Class_2_sections12-22/ruby_part_1.md, before:

# Class 2 - The Ruby Programming Language
Learning Ruby will be just as important as learning Rails. Understanding the basic syntax and programming fundamentals will be necessary before moving onto any technical framework. 

## History of Ruby and Layer of Abstraction
Ruby was develop by a man named Yukihiro Matsumoto in Japan. He believed a layer of abstraction should be given to programming languages. What is meant by a layer of abstraction? Think about your phone. You use your phone for many reasons. It's easy to use and it's capable of doing much more than call and text. However, under the hood brings a layer of abstraction that is only understood by those who created it. 

Ruby is written in C. And even C is written in assembly language, which gets translated into machine code. It's this layer of abstraction that exists in the industry that allows for a much more efficent and faster way of developing tools such as Rails.

## Printing to the terminal
Let's create a newly fresh repl in [replit](https://replit.com/) called class 2. `NOTE: Any computers with ruby installed already is fine to work with. Be sure to create a file called main.rb. Replit will have this by default.` 

Let's start out by printing to the terminal. When we print to the terminal, we allow ourselves as programmers to see the values in our code. We can choose what to output with three built in ruby keywords: 
- puts 
- print 
- p

Type the following in main.rb: 
```ruby 
puts "Hello, World!"
```
By default, replit will already have this coded for you in main.rb. `puts` will print to the terminal whatever is in the righthand side of it, in this case `"Hello, World!"`. Whatever is in double quotation marks is regarded as a string and is a specific data type. A data type is a piece of information that tells how the computer should interpret it. We will go over more data types soon. Futhermore, there are two ways to execute main.rb. 
1. You can click the `run` button in Replit and it will output the following in the terminal. 

```ruby 
Hello, world!
```
2. You can also go to the shell or terminal and enter `ruby main.rb`. This will execute the code in main.rb. 

## Variables 
A variable contains data. Technically, the name of a variable references a specific memory location that contains data. In ruby, we aren't aware of the memory location as ruby is not concern with this (as well as other higher level programming languages). To store a value in this memory location, we use the `=` sign. Keep in mind whenever we store data in our computer's memory, it is only temporary data. So when the program stops executing, the temporary data goes away.

```ruby 
message = "Hello, world!" 
```

Here we are storing the string `Hello, world!` in memory and reference that memory location with the variable name `message`. To read this line of code, we say `We set message to 'Hello, world!'`. You will also hear `We store 'Hello, world!' in message`. 

When a ruby file get's executed, it is being read from top to bottom. Hypothetically speaking, if we set message to `"Another value!"` below line 1, the memory location that message references, will now contain "`Another value!`".

```ruby 
message = "Hello, world!"
puts message
message = "Another value!"
puts message
```
### Constant Variables 
In certain use cases, we like to make sure the value the variable contains will <em>not</em> change. To create this constraint, we can create what is called a constant variable. To create a constant variable, the variable name will be all uppercase.

```ruby 
API_KEY = "123456789"
```

In case we accidently change the value of this key, it will result in an error when compiled.

```ruby 
API_KEY = "123456789"
API_KEY = "abcdefghi"
```
When this file gets compiled, `John Doe` will not appear in the terminal. 

### Naming Convention
When it comes to naming conventions, programming languages have their own style. In JavaScript, you should know variable names are `camelCase`. The common naming convention for ruby variables, however, are `snake_case`. 

### Comments in Code
It's great to leave comments in code to remind yourself or other developers what the code does. To comment code out or to bypass the compiler, use the `#` sign. Everything after `#` will not get executed.

```ruby
# API KEYS
API_KEY = "12345678"

name = "John Doe" # This is an example
```

## Basic methods
Methods are a set lines of code that have a purpose. This is a great way to resuse a piece of logic and separate our logic into defined methods. Ruby has built in methods in which we will explore latter. Let's define our own method. To define a method, to define a method we must use keywords `def`  follow by the method name and `end`. The keyword `end` signifies the ending of the method.

```ruby 
def method_name
end
```

In between `def` and `end`, we are able to execute a series of lines. The purpose of this method is to print `john doe` to the terminal.

```ruby 
def say_greetings_to
    puts "Greetings to John Doe"
end
```

However, when compiled, you will notice `John Doe` does not appear in the terminal? Why? That is because the method needs to be invoke or call to execute the series of lines say_greetings_to contains.

```ruby 
say_greetings_to
say_greetings_to() # You can call a method like this as well
```

### Parameters in Methods 
Methods aren't always this static or 'never changing'. To make this dynamic, I like to pass in data into this method outside of the method definition. To reference this data, I will include a parameter called `name`. `name` is an alias and is a reference to data being passed in. When data is being passed into a method, it is referred to as an `argument`. Here, there is one argument being passing into say_greetings_to

```ruby 
def say_greetings_to(name)
    puts name
end

say_greetings_to "John Doe"
say_greetings_to("Amy Thompson") # Another way of passing data
```

### Multiple parameters
A method can have more than one parameter. We will use a comma to separate the parameters in the method definition as well as in the arguments. The order of arguments being placed is the order they will be referenced to.


```ruby 
def say_greetings_to(name, friend)
    puts name
    puts friend
end

say_greetings_to "John Doe", "Amy Thompson"
say_greetings_to("John Doe", "Amy Thompson") 
# name will reference "John Doe"
# friend will reference "Amy Thompson"
```

## String Expressions and Methods 
In programming, there will be times where a string value is not always static. We allow a string to be dynamic and change in value. To make a string dynamic, we can use what is called string concatenation.
### String Concatenation
String concatenation is the process in which multiple strings are joined together using the `+` operator.

```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts "My name is" + " " + name
```
### String Interpolation 
String interpolation is another way of joining multiple strings and values together. This is the preferred way.
```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts "My name is #{name}" # My name is John Doe
```
In  between the opening `#{` and closing `}` will be evaluated as ruby code. 

### Built in String Methods 
Strings such as `"John Doe"` have what are called "built in ruby methods" and belong to the string class. A class is a template for objects. An object has what are called attributes(properties in JavaScript) and methods. Any string created has access to "instance methods" in the String class. [Here](https://ruby-doc.org/core-3.1.0/String.html) is a list of instance methods. On the left hand under Methods you will see a list categorized by `::` and `#`. In order to understand the documentation, methods that have `::`, are class variables. `#` are instance vaiables. Instances that belong to the String class such as "John Doe" or the name variable for short, will have access to any instance method. Here are some examples:

```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts name.class # "String"
```
The built in string method `length` returns the number of characters in a string. Keep in mind, blank spaces count as one character.
```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts name.length # 8
```

## Topics covered

- IRB
- data type methods 
  -  "test".class -> returns string, 
  -  "test".methods -> built in methods for strings
- escaping
- by value vs by reference


## USA Covid CLI Tracker Part 1
What is a gem? [source](https://medium.com/@morgannegagne/what-is-a-ruby-gem-1eec2684e68) <br>
They are simply open source libraries that contain Ruby code and are packaged with a little extra data. Using a gem allows a programmer to use the code within the gem in their own program, without explicitly inserting that code. Gems can be used for all sorts of purposes...Rails is a gem!

Let's create a gem that is a CLI (Command Line Interface) that scrapes covid-19 stats and prints them onto the console.

### Setup 

- Use an IDE such as VS Code or Replit
- In the console, enter
```bundle gem USA_COVID_19_Tracker```

```Do you want to generate tests with your gem?``` enter no <br>
```Do you want to license your code permissively under the MIT license?``` enter y <br>
```Do you want to include a code of conduct in gems you generate?``` enter y <br>

- cd into project folder
- create a file called tracker.rb under bin
NOTE: Tracker will act as our executable file

- add a print line and execute the following ```ruby bin/tracker.rb``` to the console to see if it works.

- require the file path to 'lib/USA_Covid_19__Tracker.rb" to your tracker.rb file.
```ruby
require_relative "../lib/USA_Covid_19_Tracker.rb"
```
NOTE: In lib/USA_Covid_19_tracker.rb, this will act as our root module of imports

### Preparing the CLI class

- under lib/USA_Covid_19_Tracker, create a file called cli.rb
- Create a class called CLI
- Define a method called test. In test, print out a statement.

```ruby
class CLI
    def test
        puts "test"
    end
end
```

- Under lib, in USA_Covid_19_Tracker.rb, require cli.rb so that our tracker file can use it

```ruby
require_relative "USA_Covid_19_Tracker/version"

module USACovid19Tracker
  class Error < StandardError; end
  # Your code goes here...
end


require_relative "USA_Covid_19_Tracker/cli.rb"
```

- Under bin, in tracker, instantiate an instance from the CLI class and call out the test method

```ruby
require_relative "../lib/USA_Covid_19_Tracker.rb"

CLI.new.test
```

- run ```ruby bin/tracker.rb``` in the console

- Instead of calling the test method, let's call run instead

```ruby 
CLI.new.run
```

### CLI class
- define a method named run and greeting
- print out a welcome statement in the greeting method

```ruby
class CLI
    def run
    end

    def greeting
        puts "Welcome to the Covid-19 CLI Tracker!"
    end
end
```

- in run, include system("clear") to clear the console when the program starts
- call the greeting method after system("clear")

```ruby
class CLI
    def run
        system('clear')
        greeting
    end

    def greeting
        puts "Welcome to the Covid-19 CLI Tracker!"
    end
end
```

- define another method called end_program
- in the program, print out "See ya latter!"
- Inlude it in the run method

```ruby
class CLI
    def run
        system('clear')
        greeting
        end_program
    end

    def greeting
        puts "Welcome to the Covid-19 CLI Tracker!"
    end

    def end_program
        puts "See ya later!"
    end
end
```

- define a method called menu
- store user input in a variable called input
- call menu inside of the run method between greeting and end_program

```ruby
    def run
        system('clear')
        greeting
        menu  # <------ here
        end_program
    end
.
.
.
    def menu
        input = gets.chomp.downcase
    end
```

- define a method called list_options
  - use <<- and regex to print a multi-line string
- call list_options in menu

```ruby
    def menu
        list_options
        input = gets.chomp.downcase
    end
    def list_options
    # <<- targets a multi-line string with a reference of DOC (DOC is an alias)
    # gsub allows for pattern replacement and regular expressions
    # /^\s*/ means target every white space before the the first character
    # the '' means replace every white space with an empty quote
    # try replacing '' with '_'
        puts <<-DOC.gsub /^\s*/, '' 
            1.
            2.
            3.
            Which one would you prefer?
        DOC
    end
```

enter ```ruby bin/tracker``` in the terminal

#### References
- https://launchschool.com/books/ruby/read/introduction
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_(programming_language)

Commit message:

String conc., interpolation and user input

Class_2_sections12-22/ruby_part_1.md, after:

# Class 2 - The Ruby Programming Language
Learning Ruby will be just as important as learning Rails. Understanding the basic syntax and programming fundamentals will be necessary before moving onto any technical framework. 

## History of Ruby and Layer of Abstraction
Ruby was develop by a man named Yukihiro Matsumoto in Japan. He believed a layer of abstraction should be given to programming languages. What is meant by a layer of abstraction? Think about your phone. You use your phone for many reasons. It's easy to use and it's capable of doing much more than call and text. However, under the hood brings a layer of abstraction that is only understood by those who created it. 

Ruby is written in C. And even C is written in assembly language, which gets translated into machine code. It's this layer of abstraction that exists in the industry that allows for a much more efficent and faster way of developing tools such as Rails.

## Printing to the terminal
Let's create a newly fresh repl in [replit](https://replit.com/) called class 2. `NOTE: Any computers with ruby installed already is fine to work with. Be sure to create a file called main.rb. Replit will have this by default.` 

Let's start out by printing to the terminal. When we print to the terminal, we allow ourselves as programmers to see the values in our code. We can choose what to output with three built in ruby keywords: 
- puts 
- print 
- p

Type the following in main.rb: 
```ruby 
puts "Hello, World!"
```
By default, replit will already have this coded for you in main.rb. `puts` will print to the terminal whatever is in the righthand side of it, in this case `"Hello, World!"`. Whatever is in double quotation marks is regarded as a string and is a specific data type. A data type is a piece of information that tells how the computer should interpret it. We will go over more data types soon. Futhermore, there are two ways to execute main.rb. 
1. You can click the `run` button in Replit and it will output the following in the terminal. 

```ruby 
Hello, world!
```
2. You can also go to the shell or terminal and enter `ruby main.rb`. This will execute the code in main.rb. 

## Variables 
A variable contains data. Technically, the name of a variable references a specific memory location that contains data. In ruby, we aren't aware of the memory location as ruby is not concern with this (as well as other higher level programming languages). To store a value in this memory location, we use the `=` sign. Keep in mind whenever we store data in our computer's memory, it is only temporary data. So when the program stops executing, the temporary data goes away.

```ruby 
message = "Hello, world!" 
```

Here we are storing the string `Hello, world!` in memory and reference that memory location with the variable name `message`. To read this line of code, we say `We set message to 'Hello, world!'`. You will also hear `We store 'Hello, world!' in message`. 

When a ruby file get's executed, it is being read from top to bottom. Hypothetically speaking, if we set message to `"Another value!"` below line 1, the memory location that message references, will now contain "`Another value!`".

```ruby 
message = "Hello, world!"
puts message
message = "Another value!"
puts message
```
### Constant Variables 
In certain use cases, we like to make sure the value the variable contains will <em>not</em> change. To create this constraint, we can create what is called a constant variable. To create a constant variable, the variable name will be all uppercase.

```ruby 
API_KEY = "123456789"
```

In case we accidently change the value of this key, it will result in an error when compiled.

```ruby 
API_KEY = "123456789"
API_KEY = "abcdefghi"
```
When this file gets compiled, `John Doe` will not appear in the terminal. 

### Naming Convention
When it comes to naming conventions, programming languages have their own style. In JavaScript, you should know variable names are `camelCase`. The common naming convention for ruby variables, however, are `snake_case`. 

### Comments in Code
It's great to leave comments in code to remind yourself or other developers what the code does. To comment code out or to bypass the compiler, use the `#` sign. Everything after `#` will not get executed.

```ruby
# API KEYS
API_KEY = "12345678"

name = "John Doe" # This is an example
```

## Basic methods
Methods are a set lines of code that have a purpose. This is a great way to resuse a piece of logic and separate our logic into defined methods. Ruby has built in methods in which we will explore latter. Let's define our own method. To define a method, to define a method we must use keywords `def`  follow by the method name and `end`. The keyword `end` signifies the ending of the method.

```ruby 
def method_name
end
```

In between `def` and `end`, we are able to execute a series of lines. The purpose of this method is to print `john doe` to the terminal.

```ruby 
def say_greetings_to
    puts "Greetings to John Doe"
end
```

However, when compiled, you will notice `John Doe` does not appear in the terminal? Why? That is because the method needs to be invoke or call to execute the series of lines say_greetings_to contains.

```ruby 
say_greetings_to
say_greetings_to() # You can call a method like this as well
```

### Parameters in Methods 
Methods aren't always this static or 'never changing'. To make this dynamic, I like to pass in data into this method outside of the method definition. To reference this data, I will include a parameter called `name`. `name` is an alias and is a reference to data being passed in. When data is being passed into a method, it is referred to as an `argument`. Here, there is one argument being passing into say_greetings_to

```ruby 
def say_greetings_to(name)
    puts name
end

say_greetings_to "John Doe"
say_greetings_to("Amy Thompson") # Another way of passing data
```

### Multiple parameters
A method can have more than one parameter. We will use a comma to separate the parameters in the method definition as well as in the arguments. The order of arguments being placed is the order they will be referenced to.


```ruby 
def say_greetings_to(name, friend)
    puts name
    puts friend
end

say_greetings_to "John Doe", "Amy Thompson"
say_greetings_to("John Doe", "Amy Thompson") 
# name will reference "John Doe"
# friend will reference "Amy Thompson"
```

## String Expressions and Methods 
In programming, there will be times where a string value is not always static. We allow a string to be dynamic and change in value. To make a string dynamic, we can use what is called string concatenation.
### String Concatenation
String concatenation is the process in which multiple strings are joined together using the `+` operator.

```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts "My name is" + " " + name
```
### String Interpolation 
String interpolation is another way of joining multiple strings and values together. This is the preferred way.
```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts "My name is #{name}" # My name is John Doe
```
In  between the opening `#{` and closing `}` will be evaluated as ruby code. 

### Built in String Methods 
Strings such as `"John Doe"` have what are called "built in ruby methods" and belong to the string class. A class is a template for objects. An object has what are called attributes(properties in JavaScript) and methods. Any string created has access to "instance methods" in the String class. [Here](https://ruby-doc.org/core-3.1.0/String.html) is a list of instance methods. On the left hand under Methods you will see a list categorized by `::` and `#`. In order to understand the documentation, methods that have `::`, are class variables. `#` are instance vaiables. Instances that belong to the String class such as "John Doe" or the name variable for short, will have access to any instance method. Here are some examples:

```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts name.class # String
```
The built in string method `length` returns the number of characters in a string. Keep in mind, blank spaces count as one character.
```ruby 
name = "John Doe"
puts name.length # 8
```
You will occasionally is a `?` at the end of methods such as `empty?`. This will return a boolean. A boolean is a specific data type in which refers to two values 
```ruby 
true
false
```
Booleans are used for conditionals and will be further explained as we move along in the curriculum. `empty?` will check the number of characters in a string. If the string has no characters or the length is 0, then `empty?` will return true. Otherwise false.

```ruby 
    puts "John Doe".empty? # false
```

## Getting User Input 
Wouldn't it be more interesting if we were to get user input? To be able to do this, let's call `gets.chomp`. After doing so, you will notice your terminal will 'pause' and wait for a user input. Once you have entered a few characters, the IDE will continue executing the rest of the code.

```ruby 
puts "What's your name?" 
name = gets.chomp
puts "My name is #{name}."
```

## Topics covered

- IRB
- data type methods 
  -  "test".class -> returns string, 
  -  "test".methods -> built in methods for strings
- escaping
- by value vs by reference


## USA Covid CLI Tracker Part 1
What is a gem? [source](https://medium.com/@morgannegagne/what-is-a-ruby-gem-1eec2684e68) <br>
They are simply open source libraries that contain Ruby code and are packaged with a little extra data. Using a gem allows a programmer to use the code within the gem in their own program, without explicitly inserting that code. Gems can be used for all sorts of purposes...Rails is a gem!

Let's create a gem that is a CLI (Command Line Interface) that scrapes covid-19 stats and prints them onto the console.

### Setup 

- Use an IDE such as VS Code or Replit
- In the console, enter
```bundle gem USA_COVID_19_Tracker```

```Do you want to generate tests with your gem?``` enter no <br>
```Do you want to license your code permissively under the MIT license?``` enter y <br>
```Do you want to include a code of conduct in gems you generate?``` enter y <br>

- cd into project folder
- create a file called tracker.rb under bin
NOTE: Tracker will act as our executable file

- add a print line and execute the following ```ruby bin/tracker.rb``` to the console to see if it works.

- require the file path to 'lib/USA_Covid_19__Tracker.rb" to your tracker.rb file.
```ruby
require_relative "../lib/USA_Covid_19_Tracker.rb"
```
NOTE: In lib/USA_Covid_19_tracker.rb, this will act as our root module of imports

### Preparing the CLI class

- under lib/USA_Covid_19_Tracker, create a file called cli.rb
- Create a class called CLI
- Define a method called test. In test, print out a statement.

```ruby
class CLI
    def test
        puts "test"
    end
end
```

- Under lib, in USA_Covid_19_Tracker.rb, require cli.rb so that our tracker file can use it

```ruby
require_relative "USA_Covid_19_Tracker/version"

module USACovid19Tracker
  class Error < StandardError; end
  # Your code goes here...
end


require_relative "USA_Covid_19_Tracker/cli.rb"
```

- Under bin, in tracker, instantiate an instance from the CLI class and call out the test method

```ruby
require_relative "../lib/USA_Covid_19_Tracker.rb"

CLI.new.test
```

- run ```ruby bin/tracker.rb``` in the console

- Instead of calling the test method, let's call run instead

```ruby 
CLI.new.run
```

### CLI class
- define a method named run and greeting
- print out a welcome statement in the greeting method

```ruby
class CLI
    def run
    end

    def greeting
        puts "Welcome to the Covid-19 CLI Tracker!"
    end
end
```

- in run, include system("clear") to clear the console when the program starts
- call the greeting method after system("clear")

```ruby
class CLI
    def run
        system('clear')
        greeting
    end

    def greeting
        puts "Welcome to the Covid-19 CLI Tracker!"
    end
end
```

- define another method called end_program
- in the program, print out "See ya latter!"
- Inlude it in the run method

```ruby
class CLI
    def run
        system('clear')
        greeting
        end_program
    end

    def greeting
        puts "Welcome to the Covid-19 CLI Tracker!"
    end

    def end_program
        puts "See ya later!"
    end
end
```

- define a method called menu
- store user input in a variable called input
- call menu inside of the run method between greeting and end_program

```ruby
    def run
        system('clear')
        greeting
        menu  # <------ here
        end_program
    end
.
.
.
    def menu
        input = gets.chomp.downcase
    end
```

- define a method called list_options
  - use <<- and regex to print a multi-line string
- call list_options in menu

```ruby
    def menu
        list_options
        input = gets.chomp.downcase
    end
    def list_options
    # <<- targets a multi-line string with a reference of DOC (DOC is an alias)
    # gsub allows for pattern replacement and regular expressions
    # /^\s*/ means target every white space before the the first character
    # the '' means replace every white space with an empty quote
    # try replacing '' with '_'
        puts <<-DOC.gsub /^\s*/, '' 
            1.
            2.
            3.
            Which one would you prefer?
        DOC
    end
```

enter ```ruby bin/tracker``` in the terminal

#### References
- https://launchschool.com/books/ruby/read/introduction
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby_(programming_language)
